'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 2008 Donal K. Fellows
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
.TH Tcl_ParseArgsObjv 3 8.6 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.\" The -*- nroff -*- definitions below are for supplemental macros used
.\" in Tcl/Tk manual entries.
.\"
.\" .AP type name in/out ?indent?
.\"	Start paragraph describing an argument to a library procedure.
.\"	type is type of argument (int, etc.), in/out is either "in", "out",
.\"	or "in/out" to describe whether procedure reads or modifies arg,
.\"	and indent is equivalent to second arg of .IP (shouldn't ever be
.\"	needed;  use .AS below instead)
.\"
.\" .AS ?type? ?name?
.\"	Give maximum sizes of arguments for setting tab stops.  Type and
.\"	name are examples of largest possible arguments that will be passed
.\"	to .AP later.  If args are omitted, default tab stops are used.
.\"
.\" .BS
.\"	Start box enclosure.  From here until next .BE, everything will be
.\"	enclosed in one large box.
.\"
.\" .BE
.\"	End of box enclosure.
.\"
.\" .CS
.\"	Begin code excerpt.
.\"
.\" .CE
.\"	End code excerpt.
.\"
.\" .VS ?version? ?br?
.\"	Begin vertical sidebar, for use in marking newly-changed parts
.\"	of man pages.  The first argument is ignored and used for recording
.\"	the version when the .VS was added, so that the sidebars can be
.\"	found and removed when they reach a certain age.  If another argument
.\"	is present, then a line break is forced before starting the sidebar.
.\"
.\" .VE
.\"	End of vertical sidebar.
.\"
.\" .DS
.\"	Begin an indented unfilled display.
.\"
.\" .DE
.\"	End of indented unfilled display.
.\"
.\" .SO ?manpage?
.\"	Start of list of standard options for a Tk widget. The manpage
.\"	argument defines where to look up the standard options; if
.\"	omitted, defaults to "options". The options follow on successive
.\"	lines, in three columns separated by tabs.
.\"
.\" .SE
.\"	End of list of standard options for a Tk widget.
.\"
.\" .OP cmdName dbName dbClass
.\"	Start of description of a specific option.  cmdName gives the
.\"	option's name as specified in the class command, dbName gives
.\"	the option's name in the option database, and dbClass gives
.\"	the option's class in the option database.
.\"
.\" .UL arg1 arg2
.\"	Print arg1 underlined, then print arg2 normally.
.\"
.\" .QW arg1 ?arg2?
.\"	Print arg1 in quotes, then arg2 normally (for trailing punctuation).
.\"
.\" .PQ arg1 ?arg2?
.\"	Print an open parenthesis, arg1 in quotes, then arg2 normally
.\"	(for trailing punctuation) and then a closing parenthesis.
.\"
.\"	# Set up traps and other miscellaneous stuff for Tcl/Tk man pages.
.if t .wh -1.3i ^B
.nr ^l \n(.l
.ad b
.\"	# Start an argument description
.de AP
.ie !"\\$4"" .TP \\$4
.el \{\
.   ie !"\\$2"" .TP \\n()Cu
.   el          .TP 15
.\}
.ta \\n()Au \\n()Bu
.ie !"\\$3"" \{\
\&\\$1 \\fI\\$2\\fP (\\$3)
.\".b
.\}
.el \{\
.br
.ie !"\\$2"" \{\
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP
.\}
.el \{\
\&\\fI\\$1\\fP
.\}
.\}
..
.\"	# define tabbing values for .AP
.de AS
.nr )A 10n
.if !"\\$1"" .nr )A \\w'\\$1'u+3n
.nr )B \\n()Au+15n
.\"
.if !"\\$2"" .nr )B \\w'\\$2'u+\\n()Au+3n
.nr )C \\n()Bu+\\w'(in/out)'u+2n
..
.AS Tcl_Interp Tcl_CreateInterp in/out
.\"	# BS - start boxed text
.\"	# ^y = starting y location
.\"	# ^b = 1
.de BS
.br
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 1u
.if n .nf
.if n .ti 0
.if n \l'\\n(.lu\(ul'
.if n .fi
..
.\"	# BE - end boxed text (draw box now)
.de BE
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
.ie n \l'\\n(^lu\(ul'
.el \{\
.\"	Draw four-sided box normally, but don't draw top of
.\"	box if the box started on an earlier page.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \{\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.el \}\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.\}
.fi
.br
.nr ^b 0
..
.\"	# VS - start vertical sidebar
.\"	# ^Y = starting y location
.\"	# ^v = 1 (for troff;  for nroff this doesn't matter)
.de VS
.if !"\\$2"" .br
.mk ^Y
.ie n 'mc \s12\(br\s0
.el .nr ^v 1u
..
.\"	# VE - end of vertical sidebar
.de VE
.ie n 'mc
.el \{\
.ev 2
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\L'|\\n(^Yu-1v\(bv'\v'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu'\h'-|\\n(^lu+3n'
.sp -1
.fi
.ev
.\}
.nr ^v 0
..
.\"	# Special macro to handle page bottom:  finish off current
.\"	# box/sidebar if in box/sidebar mode, then invoked standard
.\"	# page bottom macro.
.de ^B
.ev 2
'ti 0
'nf
.mk ^t
.if \\n(^b \{\
.\"	Draw three-sided box if this is the box's first page,
.\"	draw two sides but no top otherwise.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.el \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.nr ^x \\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu
\kx\h'-\\nxu'\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\ky\L'-\\n(^xu'\v'\\n(^xu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.bp
'fi
.ev
.if \\n(^b \{\
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 2
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.mk ^Y
.\}
..
.\"	# DS - begin display
.de DS
.RS
.nf
.sp
..
.\"	# DE - end display
.de DE
.fi
.RE
.sp
..
.\"	# SO - start of list of standard options
.de SO
'ie '\\$1'' .ds So \\fBoptions\\fR
'el .ds So \\fB\\$1\\fR
.SH "STANDARD OPTIONS"
.LP
.nf
.ta 5.5c 11c
.ft B
..
.\"	# SE - end of list of standard options
.de SE
.fi
.ft R
.LP
See the \\*(So manual entry for details on the standard options.
..
.\"	# OP - start of full description for a single option
.de OP
.LP
.nf
.ta 4c
Command-Line Name:	\\fB\\$1\\fR
Database Name:	\\fB\\$2\\fR
Database Class:	\\fB\\$3\\fR
.fi
.IP
..
.\"	# CS - begin code excerpt
.de CS
.RS
.nf
.ta .25i .5i .75i 1i
..
.\"	# CE - end code excerpt
.de CE
.fi
.RE
..
.\"	# UL - underline word
.de UL
\\$1\l'|0\(ul'\\$2
..
.\"	# QW - apply quotation marks to word
.de QW
.ie '\\*(lq'"' ``\\$1''\\$2
.\"" fix emacs highlighting
.el \\*(lq\\$1\\*(rq\\$2
..
.\"	# PQ - apply parens and quotation marks to word
.de PQ
.ie '\\*(lq'"' (``\\$1''\\$2)\\$3
.\"" fix emacs highlighting
.el (\\*(lq\\$1\\*(rq\\$2)\\$3
..
.\"	# QR - quoted range
.de QR
.ie '\\*(lq'"' ``\\$1''\\-``\\$2''\\$3
.\"" fix emacs highlighting
.el \\*(lq\\$1\\*(rq\\-\\*(lq\\$2\\*(rq\\$3
..
.\"	# MT - "empty" string
.de MT
.QW ""
..
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_ParseArgsObjv \- parse arguments according to a tabular description
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTcl_ParseArgsObjv\fR(\fIinterp, argTable, objcPtr, objv, remObjv\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS "const Tcl_ArgvInfo" ***remObjv in/out
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp out
Where to store error messages.
.AP "const Tcl_ArgvInfo" *argTable in
Pointer to array of option descriptors.
.AP int *objcPtr in/out
A pointer to variable holding number of arguments in \fIobjv\fR. Will be
modified to hold number of arguments left in the unprocessed argument list
stored in \fIremObjv\fR.
.AP "Tcl_Obj *const" *objv in
The array of arguments to be parsed.
.AP Tcl_Obj ***remObjv out
Pointer to a variable that will hold the array of unprocessed arguments.
Should be NULL if no return of unprocessed arguments is required. If
\fIobjcPtr\fR is updated to a non-zero value, the array returned through this
must be deallocated using \fBckfree\fR.
.BE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The \fBTcl_ParseArgsObjv\fR function provides a system for parsing argument
lists of the form
.QW "\fB\-someName \fIsomeValue\fR ..." .
Such argument lists are commonly found both in the arguments to a program and
in the arguments to an individual Tcl command. This parser assumes that the
order of the arguments does not matter, other than in so far as later copies
of a duplicated option overriding earlier ones.
.PP
The argument array is described by the \fIobjcPtr\fR and \fIobjv\fR
parameters, and an array of unprocessed arguments is returned through the
\fIobjcPtr\fR and \fIremObjv\fR parameters; if no return of unprocessed
arguments is desired, the \fIremObjv\fR parameter should be NULL. If any
problems happen, including if the
.QW "generate help"
option is selected, an error message is left in the interpreter result and
TCL_ERROR is returned. Otherwise, the interpreter result is left unchanged and
TCL_OK is returned.
.PP
The collection of arguments to be parsed is described by the \fIargTable\fR
parameter. This points to a table of descriptor structures that is terminated
by an entry with the \fItype\fR field set to TCL_ARGV_END. As convenience, the
following prototypical entries are provided:
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_AUTO_HELP\fR
.
Enables the argument processor to provide help when passed the argument
.QW \fB\-help\fR .
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_AUTO_REST\fR
.
Instructs the argument processor that arguments after
.QW \fB\-\-\fR
are to be unprocessed.
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_TABLE_END\fR
.
Marks the end of the table of argument descriptors.
.SS "ARGUMENT DESCRIPTOR ENTRIES"
.PP
Each entry of the argument descriptor table must be a structure of type
\fBTcl_ArgvInfo\fR. The structure is defined as this:
.PP
.CS
typedef struct {
    int \fItype\fR;
    const char *\fIkeyStr\fR;
    void *\fIsrcPtr\fR;
    void *\fIdstPtr\fR;
    const char *\fIhelpStr\fR;
    ClientData \fIclientData\fR;
} \fBTcl_ArgvInfo\fR;
.CE
.PP
The \fIkeyStr\fR field contains the name of the option; by convention, this
will normally begin with a
.QW \fB\-\fR
character. The \fItype\fR, \fIsrcPtr\fR, \fIdstPtr\fR and \fIclientData\fR
fields describe the interpretation of the value of the argument, as described
below. The \fIhelpStr\fR field gives some text that is used to provide help to
users when they request it.
.PP
As noted above, the \fItype\fR field is used to describe the interpretation of
the argument's value. The following values are acceptable values for
\fItype\fR:
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_CONSTANT\fR
.
The argument does not take any following value argument. If this argument is
present, the int pointed to by the \fIsrcPtr\fR field is copied to the
\fIdstPtr\fR field. The \fIclientData\fR field is ignored.
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_END\fR
.
This value marks the end of all option descriptors in the table. All other
fields are ignored.
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_FLOAT\fR
.
This argument takes a following floating point value argument. The value (once
parsed by \fBTcl_GetDoubleFromObj\fR) will be stored as a double-precision
value in the variable pointed to by the \fIdstPtr\fR field. The \fIsrcPtr\fR
and \fIclientData\fR fields are ignored.
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_FUNC\fR
.
This argument optionally takes a following value argument; it is up to the
handler callback function passed in \fIsrcPtr\fR to decide. That function will
have the following signature:
.RS
.PP
.CS
typedef int (\fBTcl_ArgvFuncProc\fR)(
        ClientData \fIclientData\fR,
        Tcl_Obj *\fIobjPtr\fR,
        void *\fIdstPtr\fR);
.CE
.PP
The result is a boolean value indicating whether to consume the following
argument. The \fIclientData\fR is the value from the table entry, the
\fIobjPtr\fR is the value that represents the following argument or NULL if
there are no following arguments at all, and the \fIdstPtr\fR argument to the
\fBTcl_ArgvFuncProc\fR is the location to write the parsed value to.
.RE
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_GENFUNC\fR
.
This argument takes zero or more following arguments; the handler callback
function passed in \fIsrcPtr\fR returns how many (or a negative number to
signal an error, in which case it should also set the interpreter result). The
function will have the following signature:
.RS
.PP
.CS
typedef int (\fBTcl_ArgvGenFuncProc\fR)(
        ClientData \fIclientData\fR,
        Tcl_Interp *\fIinterp\fR,
        int \fIobjc\fR,
        Tcl_Obj *const *\fIobjv\fR,
        void *\fIdstPtr\fR);
.CE
.PP
The \fIclientData\fR is the value from the table entry, the \fIinterp\fR is
where to store any error messages, the \fIkeyStr\fR is the name of the
argument, \fIobjc\fR and \fIobjv\fR describe an array of all the remaining
arguments, and \fIdstPtr\fR argument to the \fBTcl_ArgvGenFuncProc\fR is the
location to write the parsed value (or values) to.
.RE
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_HELP\fR
.
This special argument does not take any following value argument, but instead
causes \fBTcl_ParseArgsObjv\fR to generate an error message describing the
arguments supported. All other fields except the \fIhelpStr\fR field are
ignored.
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_INT\fR
.
This argument takes a following integer value argument. The value (once parsed
by \fBTcl_GetIntFromObj\fR) will be stored as an int in the variable pointed
to by the \fIdstPtr\fR field. The \fIsrcPtr\fR field is ignored.
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_REST\fR
.
This special argument does not take any following value argument, but instead
marks all following arguments to be left unprocessed. The \fIsrcPtr\fR,
\fIdstPtr\fR and \fIclientData\fR fields are ignored.
.TP
\fBTCL_ARGV_STRING\fR
.
This argument takes a following string value argument. A pointer to the string
will be stored at \fIdstPtr\fR; the string inside will have a lifetime linked
to the lifetime of the string representation of the argument value that it
came from, and so should be copied if it needs to be retained. The
\fIsrcPtr\fR and \fIclientData\fR fields are ignored.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Tcl_GetIndexFromObj(3), Tcl_Main(3), Tcl_CreateObjCommand(3)
.SH KEYWORDS
argument, parse
'\" Local Variables:
'\" fill-column: 78
'\" End:
